---
layout: post
title: Rethinking Business
author: Gale Proulx
published: true
categories:
  - Professional Development
---

Capitalism tends to be associated with many of the negative aspects of the United States economy: 40 hour work days, relentless marketing, lack of family support, low wages, and so much more. Ironically, by the very definition of capitalism so many of these aspects are unrelated. The Merriam-Webster definition of capitalism is as follows: "an economic system characterized by private or corporate ownership of capital goods, by investments that are determined by private decision, and by prices, production, and the distribution of goods that are determined mainly by competition in a free market." This concept of a competitive free market may seem like the root of all that is wrong, but I would argue that this system is not inherently flawed; it is important to recognize this.

# Flaws in America's Economy

While it is easy to use capitalism as the explanation for the current state of the American economy, this unfortunately is a self-defeating statement that shines the spotlight in the wrong direction. The end of the definition of capitalism mentions that prices and production are either directly or indirectly determined by a free market. That free market is a very important piece of capitalism, as it is an inherent check and balance to any business that wishes to compete. Hypothetically, any company that wants to do ill to its customers would soon perish because there are other eager companies willing to compete for those customers. A free market means the customers are the one's who ultimately control the direction of the economy. In recent decades, the free market has disappeared in three main ways: through legislation, monopolies, and artificial competition.

Legislation has unfortunately been vulnerable to bribery since the conception of America's government. The constitution never laid any foolproof rules against politicians receiving funding from companies indirectly. Lobbying is still allowed despite the damage it has caused. The result of this easily abused influence is the rich controlling the direction of economic development. Regardless of whether or not a person believes PACs and Super PACs actually drastically influence a politician's opinion, I don't think any voter would disagree that politicians need money to run campaigns. Every political party will have a candidate that accepts donations. Money has somehow become such an integral part of government that it has blocked off all accessibility to poor Americans. Money permeates through every aspect of American politics from testifying to congress to having the ability to vote.

Naturally, corporations have the upper hand in American politics because they hold a majority of the wealth. Now that global corporations are not only possible, but successful beyond what was imagined even last century, corporations have even more influence on legislation than previously expected.

Obviously large corporations can be a problem for a government that is so heavily influenced by money, but this in itself is not inherently dangerous. Large corporations can still exist within a free market and just decide to not influence legislation. What does present a threat to the American economy are monopolies. If a company wipes out all competition, it kills the free market. Erasing a free market is erasing capitalism itself. The concept cannot stand when one of its pillars is knocked down. Stopping competition will subsequently take away any checks and balances companies previously had to abide to. This means there are no consequences for embedding a companies power within legislation itself.

Naturally, monopolies also lead to artificial competition. This false free market is one of the most dangerous recent advancements of America's economy. The illusion of free choice not only takes away checks and balances, but it starts building diversions away from the root issues and even more deeply embeds a corporation's power. Artificial competition forces people to support one side or the other of the same coin. There is no way to directly attack a corporation when it represents all sides of an argument. For example, a corporation that sells both cheap and expensive items diverts attention from the one seller instead forcing people to debate what price an item should be. Whether or not a person supports a cheaper or more expensive item, the person still supports the same company.

# Is This Capitalism?

I would argue that companies such as Facebook, Google, and Oracle are not a reflection of capitalism but more-so a dictatorship. Capitalism gains its strength from unity, never the power of an individual. Unfortunately, there can't be unity when there is one business present in a given industry. While it is true that many startups exist, it is also true that they have a legal obligation to be bought out if they become popular. Just because a local tech startup isn't directly working for Google doesn't mean they aren't playing into a system that has them working for Google's interests.

This influence doesn't stop at an executive level. The decisions that are made by these companies affect all working Americans. Low pay, long hours, questionably enforced breaks, and everything else is the direct fault of large businesses. Companies cannot influence legislation and then not claim responsibility for the current state of the economy. The imbalance of wealth currently seen in the country is not the result of Americans being lazy or unimaginative. Large corporations for decades have had the ability to make sweeping reform on the situations relevant to the majority of workers. There is no reason the pay of the least skilled jobs should stay low while higher skilled jobs keep increasing their pay. A person should not be valued solely by the circumstances in which they received their position. Currently, pay is not even a reflection of the importance of a job. (It would be hard to argue that a CEO is worth or even capable of hundreds or even thousands of the lowest paid workers.)

# Rethinking Business

Time has shown that large corporations are not capable of leading the country in a sustainable direction. Despite having very powerful leaders holding control over government, business, and individuals, there has been a surprising lack of initiative for the people. In fact, businesses have done much more for self interest than in the interest of others. Only now is there a convergence of spotlights on systemic oppression that has been intentionally built into everyday life. The trust between corporations and the people has been broken for a long time.

The idea of business needs to be restructured from the ground up. From employee dress codes to business attitudes, there needs to be a fundamental shift in how American's view business and professionalism. This cultural norm of "leaving emotional baggage at the door" is toxic and manipulative. Just the idea that a company is labeled as "innovative" for having a social mission is concerning. If a company wants to be successful, there needs to be a requirement that the wealth accumulated is distributed back to people in some fashion. Whether that distribution comes in the form of employee benefits, proper pay, or funding social justice non-profits, there needs to be some form of accountability.

It should not be acceptable for a company to live in isolation from the worlds problems. The pursuit of wealth should not be the driving factor of private decisions. The government should not require the pursuit of wealth over human lives.

Capitalism allows for businesses to have private decisions. That idea is not inherently flawed. What is currently flawed is the current mindset of American ideologies propelling the ideas of capitalism in dangerous directions which is why we all need to rethink business.
